# Seasick Brewing

This whitepaper describes the challenges and possibilities of
boat-based (mostly) small scale brewing of beer.  It discusses the
motivations, open questions, and possible solutions.

## 02/2023

### authors

jcv@netpurgatory.com

dariusz@wallbrew.com

## Introduction

Recent events have lead to an increased interest in gardening, self
sufficiency, DIY work, and similar from scratch pursuits, beyond the
doomsday prepper sub-cultures they often interest.  The homebrewing
world has always had an interest in being as self contained as
possible combined with a very strong DIY ethic.  The combination of
these factors and a desire to leave life on land behind brings up the
possibility of water-born brewing.  This could be either ocean, lake,
or even river based - depending on the brewers' needs and preference
for opened or closed waterways.

## Possible Scales

For the proposes of this paper we will assume that there are three
size scales for brewing.  In reality there is much more of a continuum
but for simplicity three scales should illustrate things well enough.

Homebrew scale will be considered anything in the maximum of **100
to 200 gallon** range per year - this is a legal limit and definition
in the United States.

Microbrew is defined as anything larger than homebrew but fewer than
**15,000 U.S. barrels** in production volume a year.  A mircobrew operation
is likely to be the most realistic scale for boat-based brewing - allowing
for flexibility within the limitations (see below) and maximizing possible
profit.

Macrobrew is defined as brewing on what we can consider an industrial
scale.  It is unlikely that macrobrew can be done on a boat (unless
something on the scale of a cruise ship can be obtained).  This is not
seen as a major loss.

## Requirements

There are several basic requirements for brewing: water, malted grains,
yeast, hops and other additions, heat, and temperature controlled
space for fermenting. To be Reinheitsgebot compliant, we can further
simplify by removing the possibility of adjuncts. There is no
Reinheitsgebot compliance issue based on production facility to the
authors' knowledge.

Malted grains, yeast, hops and other additions are all easily procured on
land and may be stored relatively easily assuming basic refrigeration
for some of them.  None of this should be significantly different for
traditional brewing beyond the added logistics of delivery of ingredients
to any mobile brewing operation.

Water is a more complicated situation.  There are two uses of water in
brewing.  The first is simply that beer is composed mostly of water.
This means a source of high quality, fresh water is needed.  For
homebrew size, 5-8 US Gallon batches this can be imported from land
without much trouble.

Anything larger than homebrew scale might further complicate importing
fresh water for an ocean-based boat brew.  With that said, the seemingly
limitless fresh water from U.S. Great Lakes offer a tempting alternative
(though, with their own set of issues - particularly the rather
harsh winters they withstand).  It's worth noting that treated water from
the Great Lakes (spare Erie) is incredibly desirable for brew operations.
This may be solved for through either permanent docking and municipal taps
(which may require further treatment depending on the water) or a deal with
harbors and marinas to provide water to the boat as part of a seasonable
docking or leasing of dock space.  While a challenge not typical of a
building-based brewery, it is not insurmountable.

The second use of water is as a thermal reservoir, generally to cool
the wort very quickly.  In this case, brewing on a boat provides
several new options as there is an effectively limitless thermal
reservoir in the ocean or lake (assuming we are not talking about
industrial scale brewing). There may be local environmental considerations
when docked that would need to be approved and sorted with local
departments of natural resources - as even large air conditioning units
in buildings are prohibited from dumbing otherwise untainted water
back into the enviornment at a higher temperature.

The next major issue is heating the water.  To brew, a large amount of
water must be boiling or otherwise heating in a controlled way.  This
would most likely have to be done with natural gas heating elements
unless someother source of heating was available on the vessel.
There is also the possibility that electric heating elements
could be employed here as most boats already have powerful electricity
generators for vital operations and systems on the vessel - brewing
would qualify as a vital operation of a brewery boat.

On the heating note, the authors of this paper, while lacking any formal
nautical training, are accomplished scroungers and interested in
utilizing "wasted" energy.  There may be some potential to utilize
the "waste" heat generated by the boat's engine room in assisting (not
driving) the boiling or mashing process. More research is needed.

Requirements for the vessel itself would be docking, mooring,
applicable licensing, (potential) dry docking, fuel, and a crew capable
of running a ship should it ever leave its dock.

Finally, the brewery would also require initial capital to purchase the
necessary components for operations, including an appropriate boat, and
hire employees. The authors of this paper do not yet know which ways a
capital raise would be most effective, the target of the raise, or whom
they would first approach for such an endeavor.  It is worth noting
that crowd-funding could very well be a viable option.  Communities love
owning a piece of business in a given area.  Breweries tend to hold a
special place in the hearts of locals.

## Challenges

There are a number of challenges this project would face - though
this should not mean it is not worthy of study and contemplation.

### Scale

The authors have outlined their three definitions of brewing scale earlier
in this whitepaper.  Acquisition costs, profits, and operational budgets may
severely limit the viability of smaller microbrewing boats.

Homebrewers would likely not see much of an issue or change to their typical
brewing process.

Macro-brewing would require a vessel well-beyond the expertise
of the authors.  Tankers, cruise ships, or some other blue water merchant ship
would likely be needed to properly service their targeted barrel volume(s).

The, likely, most viable boat-brewery would use a smaller-sized merchant ship
or large oceanic tugboat as its brewery.  Cursory internet research places a boat
that is appropriate for a brewery between 650,000 - 2,000,000 USD in 2023.
This does not include costs of retrofitting necessary equipment onto the boat.

### Stable/Consistent Brewing Conditions

(Humidity, temperature, and sloshing)

(Grain, hop, and yeast storage)

### Labor & Culture

(Offers the rather niche intersection for brewhouse workers, needing to be
sailors and brewers - or a larger workforce needed to fill these roles
separately. Something about a chief mouser for the boat as well.)

(It would be worth putting down our business culture requirements in writing
to reference.  This may include leadership structure, decision making and
equity offered to workers.)

### Sustainability

Sustainability is often a 10-dollar word used by various organizations in an
attempt to atone for any perceived or actual transgression against the
environment or community. Sea-sick, or any boat-based brewery attempted by
the authors, would commit sustainability with a deadly seriousness for a number
of reasons.

As noted by the authors in the introduction, brewers are typically a tinkering
bunch with a strong interest in all things self-sustaining. The authors believe
that this can, and should, extend to the larger scale operations involved in a
brewery - particularly a boat-based brewery.

Most modern sea-worthy vessels combust incredible amounts of fossil fuels.
Considering that such a brewery would require a large vessel, the authors are
sensitive to the fact that the main power plant of any ship they'd use would
likely be diesel electric.

The authors suspect they would be able to help offset any power plant footprint
in a few ways while ameliorating waste products.

Firstly, the deck of ship offer wonderful, unobstructed places perfect for solar
panels. As solar becomes cheaper, the authors would necessarily include solar as
part of any sustainability efforts on the boat. While electric heating elements
large enough for the proper operation of a brewery may not be efficient, many
other operations within a brewery need access to reliable electricity. Solar
on the deck of the brewery could help lower costs and lower reliance on
the grid or onboard power plant.

Secondly, the brewing process generates a great deal of bi-products that
can be repurposed. It may be possible to add a thermoelectric generator to
a brew kettle as a way to help reclaim some of the energy lost to heat itself.
Additionally, if in a tidal area, such a boat could utilize small hydroelectric
generators to capture the energy of the tide coming in and out. Alternatively,
if docked in a river or area with running water, the same sort of generator
could be used.

Thirdly, the materials used in beer production themselves are well-equipped for
secondary use. Spent grains are perfect for making bread, biscuits, dog treats,
or compost. Spent hops can see a second life as compost materials. Yeast cakes
have long been used in the production of yeast extract products enjoyed by
millions world wide.

The `Canning` section of this whitepaper will more fully delve into the authors'
plans for wider distribution, but it will adhere to the proposed brewery's
commitment to sustainability.

## Beers & Products

### Flagship Brews

#### Year-Round

Most successful breweries offer between 3-5 beers that are available
year-round.  Our Flagship Series (pardon the pun) should include at least:

1) lager
2) IPA
3) APA
4) stout

This offers a flexible range while
limiting the variables of a baseline operation.

#### Seasonal

Additionally, we should offer 1-2 new beers per season, which leadership
can decide what makes the most sense given resources and industry trends.

#### Novelty & Experimentation

(As a boat-based brewery, we would need to be authorities
on the latest in the industry and how to offer unique
experiences to our customers)

### Quality & Consistency

(The beer/beverages produced would need to be damn good
without calling attention to the boat)

## Revenue, Fundraising, & Loyalty

(We need people to initially invest in our idea and
leverage their connections to bring this thing to life -
then retain those customers)

## Distribution & Packaging

### Tap Room

One of the most profitable ways for a brewery to distribute its
product is a taproom.  The advantages are quite clear: kegs can be
reused, CO2 is abundant, and no middleman can take a cut. The
maritime nature of boat-based brewing offers novel taproom potential.

Given size constraints, it is unlikely that such a brewery could host
the taproom on the actual brew-boat (or brew-barge).  This leaves two
options while staying thematically consistent: 1) a separate, docked
taproom boat or 2) a more traditional taproom on a wharf or dock of
some type.  Noting here that "Scuttlebutt" and "The Tender" are just
some of the nautical themed names a taproom might adopt.

However, it is possible that boats on the larger end of the authors'
scale for a brewery tend to have flat decks (typically reserved for
shipping containers) which could easily house a taproom.  Furthermore,
a boat-based brewery might even consider adding a few shipping containers
back to the deck to create a pandemic-ready taproom.

### Canning

(Canning - for many reasons, any on-boat canning should want to
use AL cans as opposed to glass bottles.)

### Kegging

(Kegging)

### Regions

As with all breweries, distribution would necessarily need to begin
on a smaller scale - potentially staying that way through the duration
of a given boat-brewery's life.  The ability to physically move the
brewery, especially directly to ports, does offer a potentially
interesting opportunity for wider distribution.

## Marketing

(Add more for marketing this operation)

## Legal

The authors of this paper offer no legal understanding of
(inter)national alcohol regulations, outside of more obvious
and commonplace knowledge.  Literature outlining maritime brewing,
distillation (see below), or any other fermentation processes is
lacking.

In addition to this glaring ambiguity, state laws (for US coastal brewing)
typically vary for the production, transportation, and consumption of
alcohol.

## Challenge Mitigations & Possible Solutions

(Possible solutions, or mitigations at least, to that which is outlined
in the previous section)

## Vessel requirements

(Largely depends on volume and scale)

## Limitations

(Challenges outlined above, defining limitations as business, volume,
and so forth)

## Distilling

Distilling might also provide an interesting area for water-based
production.  It is important to note that generally speaking,
home distilling is not legal in the United States and so this section
is for entertainment purposes only.  It is unclear to the authors the
legality of distilling in international waters.

Much like for brewing, the base ingredients would need to be produced
on land.  This includes some form of fermentable sugar (potentially a
grain) and yeast.  All of these mirror the situation for brewing.

The larger concern is running a still on a boat.  The motion of a boat
might produce problems which may require stabilization of the heating
element or still-contents.  An overflow of the still onto the heating element
must be avoided at all costs.
